You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWS.org.
Today's message comes from senior pastor, Dr. Bob McCartney.
This morning, I'm going to tackle a really, really sensitive and difficult topic.
And I'm going to take a little time to do it just to let you know that.
And if you have to leave, that's OK.
But I'm on preach till I'm done this morning.
Last Monday night, one of the few bright spots in the Dallas Cowboys loss on Monday night football was a blocked punt.
The punt was blocked.
It bounced into the end zone and defensive end, Marshawn Neland fell on it.
He scored a touchdown for the Cowboys, and it was his first ever NFL touchdown that second year player had experienced.
There was jubilation on the Cowboys' sideline.
There was a celebration of what had happened in the football game.
But 48 hours later, something went terribly wrong.
Marshall and Neland was involved in a chase with DPS troopers and with the Frisco Police Department.
Eventually, they lost sight of him, and so they broke off the chase, and then his vehicle was found, wrecked and abandoned on the side of the road, but it was empty.
A search ensued, and later, 24-year-old Marshawn Neland was found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot wound.
I planned these sermons back in September, and yet it seems that the news
the headlines gave me fodder for simply introducing the topic.
Suicide has touched many of us.
As a matter of fact, most of us, our church, our family, our community, we have all been affected by suicide.
As a pastor, I will tell you, there is nothing that is more painful than trying to help a family.
who is navigating the anger, the grief, the hurt, and the shock of a loved one who commits suicide.
Equally, there's nothing more bewildering, more frustrating, more confusing than being a pastor and trying to help someone who's having suicidal thoughts.
I am under no illusion that I have all the answers this morning, but I do believe God's Word has answers for us.
And that's what we're going to dig in on.
But before I dig into the text, before we talk about the principles this morning, I want to say something to those of you who are watching this.
I realize that things that are on the internet take on a life of their own and maybe five years from now, somebody could do a search and find this on the internet.
And what I want to say to you is this, that if you're having thoughts of self-harm right now,
I want you to stop watching me, and I want you to dial 988.
988 is the National Suicide Crisis Hotline, and there's someone there who will talk to you right now about your issues.
Suicide is at its highest level in 30 years.
According to the Foundation for Suicide Prevention, it is the 10th most common cause of death in America.
But worse than that,
In 2023, there were 50,000 Americans who died by suicide.
That's one death every 11 minutes.
It is the second leading cause of death in the demographic between ages 10 and 34, nearly 1.7 million Americans attempted to commit suicide last year.
But I want you to understand this.
Behind every statistic, there is a soul
created in the image of God, whom is desperately loved by the Lord Jesus Christ.
And so this morning I want us to talk about this horrible, horrible epidemic of suicide.
Drugs and alcohol exponentially multiply the damage and the tendencies towards suicide.
Now the word suicide doesn't occur in scripture.
It's not there.
The concept does.
The reality is that Jesus gives us a very clear line that he's drawn in John chapter 10, verse 10.
And we're going to talk about that this morning.
Look at verse 10 of John chapter 10.
The thief comes, and by thief, he's referring to the enemy or Satan.
The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy.
I have come, Jesus says,
so that they would have life and have it abundantly.
The purpose and plan of Jesus is life and abundant life.
It is eternal life.
The word life is the word zoe in the language of the New Testament.
It means more than just to exist.
It is the fullness of a relationship with God.
Jesus gives us the opportunity to participate in the life of God Himself.
And by abundant life, Jesus is saying there is an overflowing quality of life that I want to give you.
It's not just that Jesus wants to lengthen our life, but he wants to deepen our life.
He wants to give our life meaning and purpose.
That is what Jesus is referring to by this abundant life.
But the contrast could not be more clear.
Satan's goals,
are to kill, to steal, and destroy.
And for Jesus, he is always on the side of life, an abundant life.
Satan's strategy is that through thoughts of hopelessness and worthlessness, that he can whisper to you, you'd be better off dead.
That is a lie from the evil one.
Those words are not from the voice of truth.
They are the voice of a liar who has been a liar from the beginning.
Some of you in this room are wrestling with thoughts that you've never told anyone else about.
Some of you are in the soul crushing weight of shame or regret and you think there is no way out.
Some of you are enduring so much emotional
and mental pain right now that you just want and out.
I want you to know there is a way out and his name is Jesus.
That is the way out.
He is the solution to your problem.
It may not be an immediate solution.
I want to say that.
I want to be clear.
I'm not promising you that tomorrow everything's going to be sunshine and roses and blue skies.
That's not the truth.
But what is the truth is that the alternative to life is always a mistake.
So this morning, I want to spend the rest of my time separating the truth from lies about suicide.
And I want to talk about five of them this morning.
Here's the first.
Suicide is not.
the unpardonable sin.
One of the things that you have heard said probably, and I get questions about sometimes, is suicide the unforgivable sin.
Now, let me be very clear.
The Bible says in the sixth commandment, in Exodus chapter 20 verse 17, you shall not commit murder.
Murder is a sin.
The word suicide comes from a Latin word.
That means self,
murder.
So please understand that suicide is a sin, but it is not the unforgivable sin.
The unforgivable sin according to Jesus is blasphemy against the Holy Spirit.
That's what Jesus said in Matthew chapter 12 verse 31.
Blasphemy of the Holy Spirit and suicide are not the same thing.
They're not even in the same neighborhood.
Now if I had time, we could plow into the ground of what is, blast me of the Holy Spirit, but simply understand this morning, it's not suicide.
So where does this thought come from that it's the unforgivable sin?
Well, there is a stream of thought in religious life that says that if you commit murder, then that's a really bad sin.
So that one gets you alienated from God.
Now, I don't usually call names, but just let me clarify it.
In Roman Catholic theology, there are two types or categories of sin.
One are called venial sins.
Those are the little sins.
Those are the sins you can be forgiven for by just confessing those.
And those sins kind of irritate God, they kind of aggravate God, but they don't alienate you from God.
But then there are mortal sins.
I mean, the big ones and murder is one of those.
And if you commit one of those,
then you got to do some serious, confessing and penance and maybe even go to purgatory before you could go to heaven.
I want you to understand all of those thoughts are found somewhere other than the Bible.
Those are not even close to biblical theology.
Categories of sin are untrue.
Every sin alienates us from God, not just the big ones.
There aren't any categories of sin with God.
It's all bad.
But here's the good news.
On the cross, Jesus died for all my sins, past, present, and future.
They are under the blood of the cross of Christ.
And when it comes to suicide, I want you to know this.
What one hopeless, confused person does in their darkest hour cannot undo what Jesus did on three dark hours on a cross one Friday.
Real Christians get their sins forgiven at one time.
All of our sins are atoned by the blood of Jesus Christ.
There's a biblical example of someone who committed suicide and went to heaven.
And his name is Samson.
Samson is one of those guys that some of you may have heard of before, but what you know about him is he was a really strong guy, had really big muscles, and he had really long hair.
Well, there's a lot more to Samson's story than that that I don't have time to tell.
But Samson was uniquely gifted by God.
He was given this great strength and great power.
Samson's strength did not come from his hair.
It came from God.
And Samson was a ruler.
He was a judge of Israel.
So God used him in really incredible ways.
But Samson made horrible decisions.
He just made really bad decisions.
And he was a guy who was ruled by his sexual appetites.
And because of that, I mean, he just made really bad calls and bad decisions in his life.
Such they were so bad that eventually God disciplined him and he allowed him to be captured by their enemies, the Philistines, had his eyes gouged out.
Delilah did shave his hair.
And that was the symbol of his strength, and so God spirit left him, and he left him powerless, and he was put in prison.
But there in prison, he began to turn back to God.
And in the last moment of his life, Samson prayed for his strength to return.
In Judges, chapter 16, verse 30, Samson said, let me die with the Philistines.
Then he pushed with all his might, and down came the temple on the rulers and all the people in it.
Thus he killed many more when he died than when he lived.
Samson knew that he was taking his own life.
He knew that he was taking his own life.
But there's something peculiar in the New Testament.
In the New Testament, there's this chapter in Hebrews, chapter 11.
You could read the whole thing if you wanted to.
And it just details all these great people of faith, these people who
who had been obedient to God and who had been righteous.
Their stories told about Abraham and their stories told about Moses and their stories about all these heroes.
And then the writer of Hebrews says this, and what more shall I say?
For time will fail me if I tell a Gideon of Barak of, there he is, Samson.
of Jeptha, of David and Samuel and the prophets who by faith conquered kingdoms, performed active righteousness, obtained promises, shut them out of lions.
Samson, who took his own life, is mentioned in the same breath with David and Samuel and the heroes of the Old Testament faith.
You see, suicide is a sin, but it is not the unforgivable sin.
By the way,
Never say to anyone who's had a family member friend commit suicide.
Never say to them, it must have been God's will.
No, it wasn't.
Sin is never God's will.
Ever.
No sin.
If a person is genuinely saved, their salvation rests on the finished work of Christ on the cross, not in their actions in their weakest moment.
But I want you to hear me.
Forgiveness does not equal permission.
To take one's life is to reject God's sovereignty over life and to inflict devastating pain on those who are left behind.
Number two, suicide is not a solution.
It only creates more problems.
Some people say, well, Bob, if a truly saved person commits suicide and they go to heaven, I mean, are you giving them a free pass?
Shouldn't we keep that secret?
Shouldn't we not like not telling that to try to prevent that?
I believe truth is always the best answer.
It's just always the best answer.
So I want you to hear me.
If you haven't trusted Jesus, if you haven't committed your life to Him, made Him your Lord and Savior, turn from your sin, received His free gift of salvation.
If you've not done that and you commit suicide, the problems
that are leading to that on this earth will seem tiny compared to the eternal suffering of hell.
You need to hear that.
If you have trusted Christ and decide to take your own life, the problems you are facing now will be small compared to the trail of pain and misery and chaos you will create
in the lives of people who love you.
And by the way, one of the lives the evil one tells people who are beginning to experience these thoughts is nobody cares about you.
Nobody loves you.
I want you to know something.
Yes, they do.
Your family loves you.
You say, well, I don't know if I believe that.
I won't tell you this.
This church loves you and I can say that with authority.
There are people who love you.
That's one of Satan's biggest lies.
But I want you to understand that suicide creates a massive problem.
If you have a shred of love for those who love you, don't do this.
In the Old Testament, there's another example of a man who committed suicide.
His name was Saul.
Saul was Israel's first king and he was uniquely blessed with God, of God, but he wasted God's blessings.
and he was impetuous and made horrible decisions.
Sometimes he went out and led Israel against their big enemy at the time, the Philistines.
And in this occasion, because of Saul's sin and the sin of the nation, God allowed the Philistines to defeat them.
And in the course of that battle, Samuel realized that he was defeated.
The Bible says,
in 1 Samuel 31 verse 3, the battle went heavily against Saul and the archers hit him and he was badly wounded by the archers.
And then Saul said to his armor bearer, draw your sword and pierce me through with it.
Otherwise these uncircumcised will come and pierce me through and make sport of me.
But his armor bearer would not, for he was greatly afraid.
So Saul took his sword and fell on it.
He killed himself.
When his armor bear saw that Saul was dead, he also fell in his sword and died with him.
Two thoughts from that.
The first is this, that Saul sent his army into chaos when he killed himself.
And not only that, but his own family, when they heard news, they began to panic and there was chaos in his family.
And what they would do is they tried to run from the advancing Philistines.
And a nursemaid picked up one of Saul's infant sons.
His name was Mephibosheth.
And as she was running in the panic after Saul killed himself, she dropped Mephibosheth.
And we don't know exactly what happened if there was an injury to his legs or hips
or if there was a spinal cord injury, but Mephibosheth was paralyzed from the waist down for the rest of his life.
He couldn't walk.
You see, there was a consequence to Saul's action to his own son.
And it may not be a physical consequence, but I'm going to tell you that a person who commits suicide leaves behind a trail of misery and pain that is undescribable.
Family members of people who commit suicide live with devastating wounds.
If you have a shred of love for your family, you need to know that your suicide would leave them scarred, doubting, hurting, and confused for the rest of their lives, not for a moment, not until the funeral's over, but forever, because Christmas will never be the same without you, ever.
their days will never be the same.
But also suicide can have a contagion effect.
There is a social contagion effect of suicide.
Saul's armor bear sees him commit suicide.
He sees the situation as hopeless and he falls on his own sword and kills himself.
High school counselors have told me that when there is a suicide
in their school or even in a neighboring school, they are on the alert for that social contagion aspect of suicide.
In 2017, Chester Bennington, the lead singer of the Rock Band Lincoln Park at the height of his success committed suicide.
And it was tragic and horrible.
But what made it all the more tragic was that he committed suicide in July of 2017.
In May of 2017, his close friend, probably the person he called his best friend, Chris Cornell, the lead singer of Soundgarden, had also committed suicide.
What made that just so stunning was that Bennington had written on social media after Cornell's death.
I cannot imagine living in a world without you.
He knew the pain of suicide and he did the same thing to his loved ones.
Suicide is a permanent solution to a temporary problem.
Most people who commit suicide do not want to die.
They want the pain to end.
That's what they desire.
I want you to hear me.
There is a faithful God who loves and he listens and he answers when we cry out to him.
He will faithfully see you through whatever you are enduring.
And I want to speak directly at this moment into some situations.
One of the most
dangerous moments, especially in the lives of young people and teenagers and young adults, is the loss of a relationship, a bad breakup.
And those moments many times lead to suicide attempts and sometimes to their success.
I want you to hear me.
I know a broken heart is a real thing.
I am not trivializing that in the least, but there is a plan beyond your broken heart.
And if you could just see five years in the future, you would know that's true.
Our former pastor's daughter, Julia Jefferson Sadler, has a podcast and she's spoken in school assemblies and she's talked about her own struggles.
when she was a teenager and a part of this church, the pastor's daughter of this church.
And she went to ride her high school and she had a tremendous emotional struggle and she could not see how life would ever get better.
And now if you could see her, she has a ministry.
She has a wonderful husband.
She and Ryan Sadler, who also grew up here, got married.
They have triplets.
And they have a wonderful life.
There was life beyond high school.
There was life beyond her pain in those years.
And I just want to plead with you.
There is life beyond this.
There is more.
Number three, real Christians can be suicidal.
Some people would say, well, if you're truly saved, you would never do that.
Faithful people can get so depressed and downhearted that they want to die.
Let me give you some names.
Moses, Job, Elijah, Jeremiah, Jonah, and Paul.
All of them got to a place where they wanted to die.
Now, I'm not saying they all tried to commit suicide.
That's not the case.
but they all got to a place where they just wanted life to end.
It became so painful.
Listen to what the Apostle Paul said.
For we do not want you to be unaware, brethren, of our affliction, which came to us in Asia, that we were burdened excessively beyond our strength so that we despaired even of life.
Paul said, I just wanted to die.
Moses said, God, would you please take me?
Jeremiah said, I wish I'd never been born.
Elijah said, it is enough.
Take my life.
And Jonah wished to die in Jonah, chapter four, verse three.
They were so defeated, so despondent and so depressed that they wanted this life to end.
You can be a true believer and experience the devastating effects of mental health issues and depression.
The myth that a true follower of Jesus can't fall into darkness and experience suicidal thoughts is absolutely wrong and it's misleading.
See, just because you are your loved one is saved, that is not an immunity.
And I want you as parents to know that you need to be on the lookout for this with your kids.
Even those who are saved and love Jesus, there are things that occur in their life and high school is hard and social media hadn't made it any better.
Even worse now is AI.
AI is not the devil, but it can be used by him.
I am pretty convinced of that.
A few weeks ago, Senator Josh Hawley brought six sets of parents before a United States Senate committee.
All six of them had had children who had interacted with AI chatbots and the AI chatbots in their discussion back and forth with the AI had eventually convinced them to attempt suicide, to encourage self harm.
And while investigations remain underway in those cases, it remind us
of how vulnerable and how insidious our enemy who wants to steal and kill and destroy can be.
And so parents, I want to encourage you.
Number one, keep the lines of communication open even when it's uncomfortable.
I know you don't want to talk about this, but somebody's got to.
Second, watch for signs of depression.
and suicidal ideation.
What are some of those?
Well, wild mood swings is certainly one of those things.
Now look, I have a teenage daughter.
I understand mood swings are a part of life, but there are sort of extremes that can go to.
Let me give you another one.
Giving away prized possessions to someone else.
I want you to have this.
And especially if you were to hear these words, I want you to have this to remember me.
There are other signs that we could probably kind of research, but parents, I know you love your children, but we all sometimes get so busy and we want to believe that what's happening in our house, it just happens, but know that you need to keep an eye on them.
Let them know that there's nothing ever so bad that suicide is the answer.
It's a permanent solution to temporary problems.
Let them know.
Finally, seek professional help.
If you had a doctor, if you had the flu, rather you'd go to a doctor.
Why wouldn't we do that for a mental health issue?
Number four, suicidal people are responsible for their decisions.
Now, this is the uncomfortable one because what we would like to think is, well, they're not really responsible for their decisions.
Yes, they are.
Judas committed suicide, and Judas was an unbeliever, but Judas was responsible for his decision.
Satan whispers the lie that what you do won't affect anybody else, and that is a lie.
There's a story in the New Testament, the apostle Paul, he's in a jail in Philippi for preaching the gospel.
And he and Silas are there, and about midnight the Bible says they're singing hymns and they're quoting scripture, they're just worshiping at midnight.
When God sent an earthquake, it shook the jail and the prison doors flew open.
When the prison doors flew open, what the jailer thought had happened was there'd been a jail break.
I mean, these people got away.
And in that world, if your prisoners got away, you were killed for it.
That's the way they kept jailers from taking bribes.
So the prison doors fly open and the jailer is about to kill himself.
Listen to what the Apostle Paul,
Luke records in the book of Acts that happened.
When the jailer awoke and saw the prison doors opened, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul cried out with a loud voice saying, do not harm yourself, for we are all here.
And he called for lights and rushed in and trembling with fear.
He fell down before Paul and Silas.
And after he brought them out, he said, sirs, what must I do to be saved?
They said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and you will be saved.
You and your whole household.
And they spoke the word of the Lord to him together with all those who were in his house and he took them that very hour of the night and he washed their wounds and immediately he was baptized.
He and his whole household.
That means his whole family got saved.
A momentary, impetuous decision, a rash,
decision that the Apostle Paul, if he had not interceded and intervened in, that Philippian jailer would be in hell.
But as it was because he didn't, he heard the gospel and was saved and his entire family got saved.
Your decisions do affect other people.
Everything you do has an impact.
And we can be sympathetic to the pain of mental illness and the problems that people have, but they are responsible for their decisions and there will be an accounting.
Finally, number five, and I want to speak in this moment to those of you who have endured the pain of losing a loved one to suicide.
Trusting God is the only way to cope with the suicide of a loved one.
There is something about suicide that is so, so crushing that is so heavy.
And I've seen people try to medicate themselves through it.
I've seen people try to self-medicate themselves through it with alcohol.
I need you to understand the end of your pain is not at the bottom of that bottle.
It won't work because when you sober up, the pain will be there.
and you'll have a hangover.
You see, what happens is this.
Satan, the liar, will come and he'll try to blame you and shame you and cripple you.
He'll try to convince you that you were responsible, that if you just texted, if you just called, if you just answered their call, that somehow this would not have happened.
I want you to know.
The voice that says, you're responsible for this is not the voice of God.
It's not the voice of truth.
And it is not going to help for you to feel responsible for the actions of another.
God will be faithful to you, to see you through the dark days of the suicide of a loved one.
Rick Warren is a pastor in California.
He's retired recently.
He started
Saddleback Church, and it became one of the largest churches in America.
But in 2013, Rick and Kay, his wife, lost a son to suicide.
He had struggled for many, many years, and one Saturday morning, they called, and he didn't answer, and they called again.
He didn't answer, and something just told Rick, you got to go.
And so Rick went over to his house and found his son.
It was devastating.
It's horrible.
Words can't describe how terrible it was.
But in an article, Rick wrote that what got them through, what continues to get them through, some 12 years later where the promises of God's Word, promises like Isaiah, chapter 43, verse 1, but now says the Lord, the Creator, O Jacob, He who formed you, O Israel, do not fear
where I have redeemed you.
I've called you by name.
You are mine.
When you pass through the waters, I will be with you and the rivers will not overflow you.
When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched nor will the flame burn you."
And promises like Hebrews 13, 5, I will never desert you nor will I ever forsake you.
If you have endured the horrible pain of the suicide of a loved one,
God promises His faithful peace, power, and provision to see you through it.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.